---
title: Of aligners and such [on hold]
subtitle: And the overhead of decisions
author: Siddharth S. Tomar
date: '2019-02-10'
categories:
  - bioinformatics
tags:
  - benchmarks
  - aligners
  - epigenetics
---

Note: This blog post is still under progress and will be in parts. I plan to keep the reading time under 10m :)

# Part I



# Preamble
Chip - My previous experience with the term “Chip” was limited to DNA microarrays, which I will henceforth call as arrays in this document. Majority of DNA microarrays used anchored oligos to “catch” the complementary DNA sequence associated with marker dye. This dye determines which anchored oligo is occupied and hence acting as an indicator for the presence of corresponding complementary DNA sequence in the sample.

ChIP - <em>Ch</em>romatin *Immunoprecipitation* - ChIP, confusingly pronounced as “Chip” - is a protocol involving immunoprecipitation of proteins crosslinked with DNA fragments. To simplify, this aims to capture the DNA fragment associated with a protein. This protein could be a transcription factor, a polymerase and so on.

ChIP-chip - A combination of the above two methods. ChIP-chip involves <em>Ch</em>romatin *Immunoprecipitation* followed by detections of DNA fragments using DNA microarrays(*chip*). Presence of fluorescence from a DNA fragment corresponds to its association with the protein which was immunoprecipitated.

ChIP-seq - <em>Ch</em>romatin *Immunoprecipitation sequencing* -  This replaces DNA microarrays with massively parallel sequencing as a detection medium. I won’t discuss the advantages and disadvantages of this method over the ChIP-chip mentioned above for now.

Alignment - This refers to assigning reads from sequencing experiments to the corresponding location in the reference genome.

## Aligners and ChIP-seq?
Recently I had a discussion with my supervisor regarding which aligner should we use for the ChIP-seq pipeline. The current crop of mainstream “DNA” aligners, i.e. Bowtie2 and BWA do respectfully well in standard DNA sequencing pipelines and are consistent. My argument here is that unless someone needs special features associated with each aligner, they really cannot go wrong with both choices. Exceptions exist where performance is a necessity. However, I'm not interested in performance and believe that many labs around the world can wait a few minutes extra for more accurate results. 
So back to the discussion - I decided to benchmark the aligners and see how they perform functionally. 

The sliced alignment landscape is considerably different and does not affect ChIP-seq workflow in a traditional sense, and hence is not discussed here.  

### Experiment setup
- Data: [ArrayExpress E-MTAB-5940](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/experiments/E-MTAB-5940/?keywords=&organism=Homo+sapiens&exptype%5B%5D="dna+assay"&exptype%5B%5D="sequencing+assay"&array=) 
- Aligners: BWA(mem and aln), Bowtie2 and Minimap2(why not ?)
- Platform: Uppmax (Rackham)
- Orchestration: Snakemake
- Software versions:
    - Bowtie2: [2.3.4.3](https://github.com/BenLangmead/bowtie2/releases/tag/v2.3.4.3)
    - BWA: [0.7.17](https://github.com/lh3/bwa/releases/tag/v0.7.17)
    - Minimap2: [2.15](https://github.com/lh3/minimap2/releases/tag/v2.15)
    - Macs2: [2.1.2](https://github.com/taoliu/MACS/releases/tag/v2.1.2)
    - TrimGalore: [0.4.4](https://github.com/FelixKrueger/TrimGalore/releases/tag/0.4.4)
    - Cutadapt: [1.13](https://github.com/marcelm/cutadapt/releases/tag/v1.13)
    - GCC: 4.8.5 20150623 (Red Hat 4.8.5-36)
- OS: Linux

I would suggest a cursory look through the Snakemake workflow. For this "benchmark" - I decided to look into H3K27ac modification (which means: H3 histone protein - 27th position Lysine - Acetylation). This particular histone mark is associated with enhancers and super-enhancers (the latter term is a bit controversial). Again, without going much into biology, let's run the aligners and measure the raw alignment performance - i.e. number of reads aligned to the reference genome using default setting(performance being the subjective term). 

The first part of Snakemake pipeline (rule clean) downloads the data and trims the first two based from 5' end. <font color="red"> For students - this is due to the "wobbly" base quality at the start of reads.</font>

The second part of Snakemake pipeline (rule prepare) downloads current human genome release from [Ensembl](https://Ensembl.org) and creates an index for the genome for all the tested aligners. For this benchmark, I decided to use the primary assembly instead of top-level. Top-level assemblies tend to confuse some aligners.

The third part of Snakemake pipeline (rule align) aligns the reads (self-explanatory). Again I'm stressing the point that we are using the default parameters. All the aligners can be tuned to perform better.

The fourth and final part of the pipeline (rule call_peak) uses MACS2 with default parameters. 
